# From newsletters to book club

It's been a few months since I've added anything to this series, but the absence doesn't meant that I've abandoned it. Instead, I've been mulling over some new strategies, and this is also a long-form experiment that takes time to play out. I'm now ready to describe the most recent segment in this journey.

Initially, I thought that newsletters might be the format that is most commonly used to get your message across in a company. Blogs weren't a commonly accepted internal format in most companies; instead, it felt like newsletters were more of a standard format through which I could create and disseminate content. 

After sending a newsletter that stuffed all content into the email body, I converted our newsletter into a series of blurbs with links pointing to full articles on an internal website (not too unlike the [personal blog newsletter ](https://tinyletter.com/tomjoht/archive) I send out). Then I meticulously tracked clicks on the links. I was discouraged to find that newsletter readership was abysmal -- people really weren't clicking the links. I mean, maybe 5-8 people clicked links, out of several hundred recipients.

I decided to pivot the newsletter approach. I felt that my audience was too small, and I needed to expand it to get a more acceptable number of clicks. I modeled my new approach after another internal newsletter that targeted every related product group in a comprehensive way (cutting across multiple groups and org lines). I figured that if I had the same reach, I'd see more clicks and traction.

I was convinced that size would be the needed trigger to see more acceptable metrics. Reason being, the newsletter distribution for my personal blog includes about 6,500 people. When I send out a newsletter, even if just a few people make comments or other reactions, it seems to make the effort feel worthwhile. Typically, about 20% open the email, and about 100-300 people click the links. So overall, there's decent reach. 

And as much as I'd like to say I don't care whether people read what I write, that's not true. Few authors write without any anticipation of being read. It's not that writing is an act of narcissism, where the author aspires to draw attention to him or herself. Instead, I want the validation that what I've written is good. That what I've created is interesting, compelling, and means something to someone besides myself. If no one reads my posts, it's a good indication that what I've written is crap and that I should change my approach. Like a comedian, if no one laughs at your jokes [reads what you write], then maybe your jokes [writing] isn't very good.

To increase my audience reach, and hopefully find the readership I sought, I partnered with two adjacent documentation groups around me and sent out a cross-product area newsletter to a larger audience. How much larger? It's hard to tell. With corporate email lists, there are often groups that include other groups as subscribers, with multiple levels of group nesting. I attempted to track down exactly how many people were included in the new list but lost visibility at some levels due to access permissions. My guess, however, is that the audience included around 1,000 recipients. Probably 3x my previous audience size.

In expanding the audience, it's worth noting another difference between internet and corporate newsletters. Within a company, you don't need to ask permission to send people newsletters. You can just target groups with information that you think is relevant to them. It's the expectation that people just receive newsletters from relevant groups. Consequently, though, I'm guessing many view their inbox as a source of spam.

Partnering with the other doc groups to generate the newsletter was tougher than I thought. Not all writers were on board (at first), and they wanted much more discussion about the newsletter "plan." I didn't have a solid plan but wanted to keep it loose and experimental. My initial idea was to adopt a systems approach and comment on larger documentation trends and patterns across the developer portal. In the first attempt, I simply wrote the newsletter content myself, identifying common themes across articles published by each group. For example, I noticed that each group was publishing information about certification, and I thought that trend was interesting. Should the certification steps follow a standard format? How did we ensure the certification steps across product areas didn't overlap or contradict each other? Did certification build on some other canonical list of features or product vision? 

However, the other writers unanimously told me that what I'd written was way too long. They also said they preferred more of a contributor model where each group provided their input to the newsletter. So I scrapped my attempt at emerging patterns approach. We also simplified the contributions to be easier. Instead of looking for higher-level patterns and themes, the new approach involved asking each group to answer these two questions: 

* What are you currently working on?
* What have you recently published? 

Each group kept their content to about 300 words, and I compiled them and sent out the newsletter. The newsletter looked pretty good and was more readable, but no one provided any feedback on it, neither as a reply to the email nor in the feedback survey at the bottom of the content. The number of opens was okay (~250), but this number doesn't tell you if the email was open for 1 second or 10 minutes. In my experience, when you don't hear any feedback about something you've published, it's usually because no one is reading it, or if they are, they aren't engaged by the content.

I started to realize that the newsletter format might be more limiting than I initially thought. I counted up about a dozen other newsletters sent by various groups just without our product area. It seemed each group wanted push out their own micro-newsletter, informing others that they exist and that they're doing awesome things. I'm guessing our cross-product documentation newsletter was greeted as "yet another newsletter," in the same way that people react when they learn that someone is starting yet another podcast. Do we really need another one of these, seriously? 

I also became more perplexed by what I saw as an impossible situation. The only way to engage an audience, in my view, was to provide more interesting content. This is what I'd attempted to do with my systems view of documentation trends and patterns. I thought if I were clever and insightful enough, people would take notice and readership would take off. But the kind of content that met that criteria would require far more of an individual voice and bold depth than would ever be possible through a collaborative newsletter. Plus, it took weeks just to get all contributors on board and to contribute just a few hundred words.

I started to think back to something I'd learned when I first started blogging back in 2006. At that time (before idratherbewriting.com existed), I had volunteered as the Suncoast STC chapter webmaster, and I revamped the chapter's website by converting it from Dreamweaver-based HTML to a WordPress site. As I explored WordPress, I tinkered around with the blogging feature and tried to get the chapter to start a group blog. In a chapter of 100+ tech comm professionals, I thought it would be easy to have people contribute an article here and there. 

Nope! The "group" blog was just Tom's posts, which were summaries of recent podcasts I'd heard. Getting others to contribute was like getting your kids to wash the kitchen dishes. After a half dozen or attempts, I realized that this not going to work. The chapter blog would be heavily dominated by my own thoughts, not representative of the chapter's voice. So I started my own blog, separate from the Suncoast STC site, and I've been writing on it for the past 16 years.

So after sending out this first cross-product-area newsletter, it dawned on me that I was up against the same problem as I'd faced in 2006. Trying to get a group to collaborate in a content project would require a lot of arm twisting and project management. And most importantly, there didn't seem to be room for the individual voice. That in-depth article I wanted to write in which I peer across the publishing whole and pull out insights, then expand on them at length? It didn't fit our simplified format of explaining what we were working on and what we'd published. 

I was stuck. The newsletter content that could represent a documentation group wasn't the sort of content that would engage anyone. The diversity of roles we targeted (project managers, engineers, QA, and others) already cared little about documentation, and now devoid of any voice or interesting perspectives, the newsletter content was destined to bore them.

Without having engaging content, no one would read the newsletter. If no one read the newsletter, why would writers want to contribute to it? This was a vicious cycle -- the fewer people who read it, the less motivated writers were to contribute. The less effort writers put into contributions, the less engagement the content would have with readers. This would in turn demotivate contributors even more. Pretty soon, we (both writers and readers) will throw up our hands and say this isn't worth it. That's the course most newsletters run. 

Despite the vicious cycle, I didn't want to kill the effort, having just sent one cross-product newsletter. Also, I realized that I could use the newsletter to perhaps promote semi-related articles. For example, if I had any other content-generation efforts, I could include links to that content in the newsletter.

## A new idea

While the newsletter idea waned, I had another idea brewing in the back of my mind. About six months ago, I started participating in a "Read a book a week" challenge at work. I'd become concerned that my reading had waned and I began to suspect the distraction of smartphones was a contributing factor, so I started this whole series experimenting with techniques to regain my long-form focus. See [My awakening moment about how smartphones fragment our attention span](/blog/awakening-moment-to-how-smartphones-fragment-our-attention/).)

Among the books I started reading, I included a few books related to the auto and transport industry, such as books on autonomous driving, Tesla, the history the automotive industry, and more. I work on documentation for geo-related automotive products, so this niche fit my work focus. To my surprise, I found the books really interesting, so I started reading more of them. Reading these auto-related books, I started to understand the big picture for the products I was documenting. 

After having read a half dozen or more auto-related books, I began toying with the idea of starting a domain-specific book club. Keep in mind, I've never actually participated in a book club all my life, despite being an English major and creative writing major. And even though I write regularly on this blog, I was hesitant to start a book club at my work because this would involve promoting it, leading it, and doing other management tasks that would take me well outside my comfort zone.

Despite my unease in starting a club, I created an internal site called the "Automotive and Transportation Book Club," listed out six books that I thought were worth reading and assigned them to a monthly cadence. I described the reason for the club and then sent out a general email to my entire product area (hundreds of people) inviting them to join. 

About a dozen people joined, which actually surprised me. During our first meeting, I introduced the purpose of the club and the books we would read. Some book clubs choose the books through member suggestions and votes, but I didn't want to end up reading lame books that weren't worth reading, which would likely kill the momentum of the club. I wanted to vet the books first. Consequently, the book club site looked more like a graduate course syllabus than a monthly book club. 

After the first orientation meeting, we held our first book club discussion about a month later. We discussed Peter Norton's *Autonorama: The Illusory promise of high tech driving*, which I [reviewed on my site](/blog/review-of-peter-norton-autonorama-illusory-promise-of-high-tech-driving/). The author, Peter Norton, advances a controversial position against autonomous vehicles, arguing that AVs will worsen rather than help transportation issues. To my relief, about 7-8 people showed up for this first discussion and had actually read the book (or part of it). The members included engineers, product managers, partner managers, and other writers. There were lots of smart people, I realized, who wanted to expand their knowledge in the domain, no matter their role. I mostly facilitated the discussion, which lasted almost an hour.

Interestingly, many said that when they read Norton's arguments, it was hard to know how to react. They didn't know what to make of it. But hearing other voices and perspectives in the room, they felt more confident in questioning or even rejecting some of the book's arguments.

I knew I'd picked a controversial topic, hoping that it would draw people in by challenging some of the directions the automotive industry is going. It seems like everyone is moving towards autonomous levels of driving, without fully questioning whether it's the right direction, and here I introduced an author who says that this whole AV endeavor is not only a fool's errand but one that actively harms efforts at more practical solutions involving public transportation. It was a bold move on my part, but one that I'd balanced with books exploring opposing points of view. 

In reality, there's no better time to start an auto and transportation book club than now. The automotive industry is on the verge of a massive transformation, with trends toward electric vehicles, autonomous driving, micro-mobility (ebikes/escooters), and mobility as a service (Uber/Lyft). 

After the first book club meeting, I started to realize that I'd found my focus. Here was a topic that interested people in a variety of roles, not just other writers. There was a real reason for people to be drawn to it -- they found the content relevant, so much that 7-8 people had purchased the book and spent hours reading it, then devoted a whole hour to discussing it. No one had even put forward two minutes of similar effort toward documentation. And I was also drawn to the topic, despite having almost no background in the auto industry.

Approaching the topic from the book club angle allowed me to engage in the content without claiming any expertise. I could summarize and present the views expounded in books. I felt that I could contribute real value by first identifying relevant books in the domain, summarizing the main arguments, articulating the discussions, finding related news and resources, and more. This would give justification for an internally focused blog, which I would brand as companion to the book club.

It's still early with the book club experiment &mdash; we've only had one real discussion meeting. But I feel like I hit a turning point with the effort and now understand the direction I need to go. 