---
title: Wayfinding post 2
---

## Developing affinity for pedestrian-hostile cementscapes? 

In the previous post, I argued that developing a love of place helps you develop wayfinding skills within that place. Unfortunately, the areas in which we live have lost a lot of their appeal and interest due to ever expanding roads, subdivisions, parking lots, and other car-prioritized infrastructure. In *The Geography of Nowhere: The Rise and Decline of America's Man-Made Landscape*, James Kunstler argues that the man-made landscape often becomes a car-optimized cementscape that loses all appeal for people to interact in. Kunstler describes the appeal of walking through car-dependent infrastructures in suburban areas as follows:

> Here there is no pretense of being in a place for pedestrians. The motorist is in sole possession of the road. No cars are parked along the edge of the road to act as a buffer because they would clutter up a lane that might otherwise by used by moving traffic, and anyway, each business has its own individual parking lagoon. Each lagoon has a curb cut, or two, which behaves in practice like an intersection, with cars entering and leaving at a right angle to the stream of traffic, greatly increasing the possibility of trouble. There are no sidewalks out here along the collector road for many of the same reasons as back in the housing development--too expensive, and who will maintain them?--plus the assumption that nobody in their right mind would ever come here on foot.
> 
> Of course, one could scarcely conceive of an environment more hostile to pedestrians. It is a terrible place to be, offering no sensual or spiritual rewards. In fact, the overall ambience is one of assault on the senses. No one who could avoid it would *want* to be on foot on a typical collector road. Any adult between eighteen and sixty-five walking along one would instantly fall under the suspicion of being less than a good citizen. (116-117)

Kunstler's book, written in 1993, couldn't more accurately describe the suburbia where I live (Kent/Renton). It's not a place where one walks. You drive everywhere. The walk score of my area is 10 (out of 100). If you do have to walk somewhere commercial, it's usually an unpleasant experience, treading on hot sidewalks beside busy roads with cars flying by at 45mph. When I see other pedestrians here, my first thought is usually, are they homeless? Are they stranded? Why is this person walking here?

In such suburban, car-dependent areas, can one develop *topophilia*, what O'Connor describes as a love of place? Can you ever develop the emotional attachment necessary to become a close observer of the land in a way that would yield more natural wayfinding abilities? Immersion in the cement infrastructure doesn't uplift you spiritually, connect you with stories from your past, or invite you to explore its rich detail with a fully present mind. It's more of a landscape where you want to get from point A to point B in the fastest way possible. It's little wonder that we've lost interesting in wayfinding. 

In *Walkable City: How Downtown Can Save America, One Step at a Time*, Jeff Speck, an urban planner, argues that a city's vitality depends on its walkability. Thanks to city engineers and the prioritization of traffic flow, cities have largely been reshaped around the needs of the automobile, with wider streets and faster speeds along those streets. The prioritization of cars in cities "have turned our downtowns into places that are easy to get to but nor worth arriving at." 

For downtowns to be walkable, Speck says "a walk has to satisfy four main conditions: it must be useful, safe, comfortable, and interesting." *Useful* means you can get common household items. *Safe* means protected from cars hitting you. *Comfortable* means that many of the streets resemble "outdoor living rooms." And "*Interesting* means that sidewalks are lined with unique buildings with friendly faces and that signs of humanity abound."

I've only experienced a few actual urban hubs that satisfy these conditions. Walking down Broadway in New York, for example, or walking along Capitol Hill's Broadway street in Seattle, or walking in the financial district in San Francisco. What's important to note is that topophilia need not be based in beautiful landscapes but rather in interesting places that you can walk in. These urban streets take on interest through the many unique shops and people in these spaces.

Most downtown areas near to where I've lived, however, such as downtown Renton or downtown Tacoma, align with Kunstler's and Speck's depiction of a city landscape that has been reshaped to accommodate cars. It would be hard to develop a connection with these places.

Although the downtown centers near me hold little appeal, I am, in fact, located one of the most beautiful areas in the Northwest. South Seattle might be an unappealing industrial region (with some warehouses and complexes that would make IKEA look small), but southeast King County (Kent, Renton) sits at the edge of the Cascades in a lush, green area filled with tall Fir trees, watersheds, and rolling hills. Drive east for 15 minutes from Kent and you might think you're in another state entirely given the rolling rural landscape.

The other week I needed to drop my 11-year-old off at a week-long summer camp near the Cascade foothills. I first routed to the destination using Google Maps on my computer. The initial route followed along highway 167, which parallels I-5. Two alternates were also proposed. Trying to break out of the pre-programmed lifeless road routes, I decided to travel along a custom scenic route. Taking the route not optimized for speed is almost never the default.

If you look at the recommended route, the scenic route takes just 1 minute longer (54 minutes, traveling 33.9 miles versus the speed-optimized route, which takes 53 minutes, traveling 38.7 miles) but the scenic route is deprioritized in favor of the faster route (for just 1 minute of time saved!). The recommended route not only saves 1 minute but involves traveling at a faster speed (which means noticing fewer details). The faster speed allows you to travel an extra 5 miles along a highway. If you look at the map, which route looks more enjoyable to drive? Look at all these green areas along the scenic route.

Switching into satellite view gives an even better sense of how green and forest-filled the scenic route is. Pretty much the only thing east of the scenic route is the Cascade mountain range.

I didn't want to use GPS to get to the camp, so I ended up printing off the map. Even traveling this short distance (a one-hour trip) made paper maps problematic. My purchased print map of the area (a GM Johnson City Map) didn't extend into Enumclaw, and I didn't have another map of that area with the needed detail. I tried printing off the route overview but it lacked the scale for the various connection points and turns that I'd need to make. This is one problem with relying on a printed map -- if you drive more than an hour, you exceed the scope of the map. If you get a larger scale map, it doesn't show the needed detail within the areas you're driving. I didn't have a Washington Atlas.

In the end, I took screenshots of the various connection points and referenced them from the larger map, like this:

[carbanado-map1.jpg etc]

Albeit tedious, this method also allowed me to study the route a bit more. The drive was, in fact, much more scenic and enjoyable than the time-optimized route along 167. My 15-year-old and 17-year-old are both learning to drive, so I sat in the front passenger seat, fully attentive and alert (even more so than when I'm driving because they're both still novices), and navigated for them while they drove. We stopped in Wilkeson and ate at a small diner called a Simple Goodness Soda Shop that had an interior decor they described as "Americana Mining Town chic."

[carbanado-scenery1]

Modern GPS technology optimizes our route algorithms under the principle that getting to a destination the fastest way possible is the preferred route. There's no setting to adjust for that. Instead, you have to go out of your way to find more scenic routes. Even as my children drove (which can be somewhat terrifying, as they're still new drivers), it was much more peaceful to travel a bit slower and through this lush green area. I developed more of an interest in the towns and scenery. I wanted to know more of the history of places like Buckley, Enumclaw, and Kangley. 

If I really wanted to develop wayfinding skills, the next step would be for me to learn the stories of these places, to maybe make day trips into these areas and be more observant of their city details and environment. In short, to cultivate a sense of topophilia. Topophilia doesn't naturally develop from a beautiful vista or two. Topophilia comes from spending time and having experiences in an area, either by living there or learning from those who do.

At least the paper maps helped me keep focused on the environment. We did get lost briefly, though it only involved a 10 minute detour. I sensed we were off course, checked the GPS to confirm it, and then backtracked to realign with our planned route. I don't think GPS itself is bad, it's relinquishing our own decision-making to the turn-by-turn directions of an algorithm that might be at odds with our goals (like optimizing for speed instead of for place), without thinking about that algorithm or questioning its omniscience.

As we drove, I kept my focus on the area, not on my phone. In other words, I looked up. Some researchers say navigation involves connecting vistas, "traveling along a particular route so as to generate or re-create the temporally structured flow of information that uniquely specifies that path to the destination" (O'Connor, 181). These vistas connect in sequences that mimic the temporal harmony of music. Véronique Bohbot, author of *The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map," explains:

> Once you have learned the relationship between landmarks, you can derive a novel route to any destination from any starting position in the environment. Spatial memory is allocentric [outside your own perspective], it's independent of your starting position. You use spatial memory when you can picture the environment in your mind's eye" (qtd in O'Connor, 263). 
 
Some landmarks can help orient me -- a flowing river, for example, or mountains in the distance, especially Mt. Rainier. Distinctive landmarks aren't often visible through a barrier of similar-looking fir trees, though. But by studying out my route, I'd become familiar with the sequence of towns: Maple Valley to Black Diamond, then to Enumclaw, Buckley, Burnette, Wilkeson, and so on. As we drove, road signs often indicated junctions to those connecting towns (this way, rather than looking for the junction to 410 or the switch to the 165, you just followed the sign lead to the next town in the sequence). Rather than natural landmarks, the small towns themselves provided the visual cues about how to navigate without GPS. 

## Spatial and scientific reasoning from Wayfinding

Regardless of whether you actually develop successful wayfinding skills, there's another reason for wayfinding: it stimulates the spatial reasoning of your brain's hippocampus. This gets us more to the reasons why neuroscientists and other academics are fascinated by wayfinding. The hippocampus is the area of the brain that lights up during wayfinding, but the hippocampus doesn't just perform spatial mapping; it encodes events in a location context in your memory and gives rise to scientific thinking and imagination.

Some researchers think scientific reasoning developed as a result of early hunters tracking animals by interpreting signs. This is called the *social trackways theory*. O'Connor says, "Hominids are animals that learned to 'read' the tracks of other hominies and animals and eventually infer meaning about events that happened in the past from these symbols. This enabled them to predict future behaviors based on these stories and use them to find one another, avoid predators, and successfully hunt prey" (105). In other words, as early humans tried to find the locations of animals, they had to look closely at tracks and interpret signs in the environment. They had to assemble these signs into a coherent story that would explain which animals had been there and predict where they had gone.

Louis Liebenberg, Harvard professor of evolutionary biology, says "[trackers] have to create a working hypothesis in which spoor evidence is supplemented with hypothetical assumptions based not only on their knowledge of animal behavior, but also on their creative ability to solve new problems and discover new information." Liebenberg argues that "rational scientific thinking didn't originate with the ancient Greeks but with hunter-gatherers" (qtd. in O'Connor, 218-19).

Tracking requires a great number of logical inferences and deductions. This thinking eventually led to similar analytical thought processes like Sherlock Holmes, Freud, and others, O'Connor explains (101). "Our existence depends on thousands of instances of inference and deduction that allow us to draw conclusions about other people and things, what has happened and what will happen," O'Connor says (103). The hunter constructs a "narrative sequence" based on the perceived signs to indicate what happened in a place and where an animal ventured to (102). These narrative sequences gave way to story and storytelling, which some academics believe is the center piece of human intelligence (122-23).

Apparently, this same reasoning process also gave way to *autonoetic* thought processes, in which humans are able to see themselves from an outside perspective. The "autonoetic consciousness" is "the capacity to be aware of one's own existence as an entity in time" (105). If you can conceive of an animal's purpose for having been in a place and where it traveled to, you can apply the same thought processes to yourself, observing your own self as if an outside observer, analyzing and perceiving yourself and your actions as if from another person's perspective.

As you can guess, these reasoning processes don't light up in the brain when people blindly follow turn-by-turn directions in a GPS-based app. If you're not making decisions, you're not getting any of the benefits of wayfinding. In fact, most of my wayfinding doesn't involve anything approaching the kind of observations and deductions required to track animals. In my wayfinding, I study a map beforehand, identify what appears to be a good route, commit it more or less to memory (maybe with some notes on paper, or by printing it out), and then navigate there. I'm making a minimal number of decisions about the route -- optimizing for safety, efficiency, and scenery. 

But the type of reasoning involved in animal tracking is much more Sherlock Holmesian. After reading this section in O'Connor's book, one of my daughters lost her iPhone, and filled with confidence about the development of the human brain through animal tracking, I thought I could track down the phone's whereabouts. Like an early hunter thinking through the details, I narrowed down the last time she had the phone, events that day and since, potential places it could and could not be, a radius from the last know location before the battery died, common places where my daughter interacted in house, and more. I thought I could think through the problem, or potentially eliminate all other possibilities until arriving at the location the phone must be (just as Holmes would say, "When you have eliminated all which is impossible, then whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth"). Alas, despite my initial confidence, I did not locate the iPhone. It is still lost. 

However, the experience made me more aware of this scientific reasoning and how it connects with wayfinding. I think similar modes of thinking could be observed in non-wayfinding scenarios. For example, a programmer who tracks down the source of a tech bug employs similar logical skills. To troubleshoot, the programmer might isolate different elements to test, or might strip down a piece of code to its simplest form and them build it back up piece by piece, analyzing the effects of each addition until it breaks. The programmer might search error messages, log files, recreate the issue and observe different analytics (memory usage, performance waterfalls, etc.) all trying to track down the whereabouts of the faulty code. The troubleshooter might identify all the components in a system and draw arrows in how they interrelate, and do other intuitive tasks to suss out the issue. 

Anytime you're problem solving, you're paying close attention to detail and making many decisions and adjustments based on observations and feedback. How might this same decision-making play out in current practices of modern wayfinding with maps? I've spent many hours looking at bike routes in the areas near me. Which streets look safe? If the streets lack protected paths, are the sidewalks safe? How fast are the cars traveling? Can they see me if I'm riding in the road? Does the route get me to a public transportation hub that could connect me to another part of the city? Would a bus, train, link light rail, or some other transportation service be available for the starting location and destination I want to go? What combination of car + train + bike would work best, getting me there in about an hour? Which segment of the journey is best accomplished by each mode of travel? Would a longer route, more scenic route be safer? Would an eBike close a longer distance for me or just create other issues? How does rain complicate the route? Am I riding up or downhill? Which time would be best to leave at? What's the maximum length for each segment mode? If I optimize for time but sacrifice exercise, is that actually saving me time? Can I be productive on a train? What about train productivity during rush hour, when only standing room is available?

I've spent days looking at maps, then exploring areas in experiential ways, taking note of the widths of bike paths, the inclines or declines, traffic congestion, stop-and-go momentum with lights, and more. Then I take this feedback and adjust my route and plan. Does this attempt to find optimal bike routes work qualify as wayfinding? Does it involve enough decision-making, experimentation, imagination, logical inferences from sign reading, feedback loops, and other judgements that would cause my hippocampus and prefrontal cortex to come alive? 

When I finally found a commute that seemed to work for me, I was ecstatic. I could get from home to work (door to door) in 70 minutes by combining car + train + bike, traveling an impressive distance in a predictable time even with traffic congestion. I wrote about my strategy in [My multimodal commuting strategy](https://idratherbewriting.com/blog/multimodal-commuting-strategies.html) and later volunteered for a [commuter spotlight](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxMU3pP1bLE&ab_channel=CommuteSeattle).

## Keeping the wayfinding mindset fresh

With wayfinding, one danger is that after you find a route, once that route becomes a habit, and you no longer use your spatial reasoning and deductive powers, your hippocampus no longer gets used. Instead, the path becomes encoded to an automated habit stored by the caudate nucleus. O'Connor says when this happens, "autopilot takes over. You see the white building, it acts as a stimulus and triggers a response to turn left to get to the bakery" (263).

This pattern befalls all successful wayfinders, because as soon as you find your way and start taking that route time and again, all the brain benefits of wayfinding seem to disappear. To counter this, O'Connor says you need to vary your routes, try new paths, and more. You want to avoid automation taking over. "Take new streets and shortcuts to get places; regularly draw a bird's-eye view of your environment with landmarks; incorporate new behaviors and routes into your daily life" (268).

Reading this, I thought about how my wife likes to go hiking in the same Lake Desire trail system. She's been there so many times (75 or more within the past year, for sure) that she knows the right paths through the many unmarked (or poorly described) trails. She no longer has to think about whether to turn left or right at the many forks and junctions. Although the trail junctions do have signs, she's long past the point where she even looks at them. She can put aside any thinking about wayfinding and focus on a podcast or chat with a friend. She turns at each fork in the trail without even thinking which way to go. It's the same way that driving home, when I get to about 2 miles from home, I no longer even look at road signs because the landscape is visually familiar. I sometimes forget the names of streets.

I sometimes accompany my wife on these hikes. On the most recent outing, I asked if we could go somewhere new. So instead of Lake Desire, we went to Henry's Ridge. The trails were spaghetti (a compressed pattern designed more for mountain bike riding, it seems, rather than hiking). I printed out a map and we tried to navigate by looking at various signs, but the map was rudimentary and seemed incomplete or inaccurate compared to the reality of the trails. Nevertheless, we compared signs posted on trees with trail names on the map and made our best guesses. 

We walked first along Stingr trail and then on Beaver Trax, over to Ravensdale Lake, then up Snake trail and across Bail trail and then following some wider general access paths and who knows what -- eventually, we just started walking in the general direction toward our car along whatever trail seemed headed in that direction. A couple of times my wife checked her GPS to ensure we were heading in the right direction.

By trying a new route, we were forced into a state of more acute awareness of the environment, especially when we weren't sure which way to go. This hyper awareness prompted me wife to take more stock of the many types of trees, plants, and other vegetation. At least a half dozen times she stopped to use her naturalist app to identify the type of tree/plant/shrub we were passing.

[photos]

Comparing a map's drawings with what you see in real life is always a mismatch, which is the whole difficulty of wayfinding. The mismatch reinforces the truth that all maps are a metaphor to the environment, optimizing for some detail that the map maker wanted to emphasize. By definition, maps must be rudimentary subset of what you actually see in the environment. This mismatch between the map (what you see on paper) and the world (what you see looking around you) is what forces our brain to make associations, interpretive leaps, to infer conclusions from small details, and so on. It forces you into spatial reasoning modes to make some correlation between a model on paper with a model of the real world. When the map doesn't seem to match reality, that's when the brain's spatial powers kick into overdrive. Is this scribble the trail fork we're looking at? What other landmarks can we see to confirm that what we're looking at is in fact this mark on the map?

Following a trail map is highly similar to following product instructions to put together some physical product, such as a dresser or, in the latest purchase, a composter. One locates the instructions, looks at the pictures and then tries to map the images to the pieces, screws, and other unfamiliar mechanical gizmos in the box. Then step by step, you correlate the assembly pictures with the various pieces strewn all over the floor until you build the object. 

[image of composter instructions]

In other words, instructions (especially highly visual ones) are a map that the user must try to follow. It involves a high degree of spatial reasoning, comparing, matching, intuiting, and more. Assembling things isn't something anyone can do without practice. My youngest daughter (11 years old) is a skilled artisan with cardboard, but she flounders when assembling anything from IKEA. 

My wife, on the other hand, scored high on the ASVAB test (the military even tried to recruit her because of her score), and seems to have a knack for interpreting instructions to assemble products. When I assist, I often just want to be the grunt who does what she says (e.g., insert this screw here, bolt this there) because I know that being the interpreter requires much more reasoning, spatial interpretation and identification, etc. It often makes my brain hurt. I supply the muscle, and she supplies the brains.

## Over romanticizing wayfinding?

If scientific reasoning, storytelling, and imagination aren't limited to wayfinding tasks (but could apply to broader tasks like troubleshooting, bicycle path routing, and assembly instructions), then perhaps we're over-romanticizing wayfinding skills. The reality is that there's not much of an economic market for environmental wayfinding anymore. All the cultures O'Connor studied (the Inuit, Aboriginal Australians, and Oceania people) seem to be cultures heading toward extinction. Many of the Inuit now use snowmobiles and GPS today, for example. 

To use an analogy, suppose you hire a trucker to transport goods from the west coast to east coast. One trucker manages to drive the route entirely from memory and his or her wayfinding skill, without a map at all. The other trucker uses a mapping app from the start to end. Both arrive at the same time. While the wayfinding trucker's skills are impressive, it doesn't lead to any economic advantage. They would still be paid the same. Learning wayfinding in some ways feels like the equivalent of doing long division by hand instead of using a calculator. It's cool to be able to do it, but why? 

The principles of careful observation, scientific analysis, story-building, and so on, are highly relevant to many modern technological contexts. It's much more useful to develop these skills in a technology context, being able to troubleshoot computer bugs, solve logistical problems, navigate large projects, structure information according to information architectural principles, and more. Most certainly, O'Connor's 300 page text with hundreds of cited sources, organized along a careful structure to advance her argument and communicate a sense of feeling in the reader, isn't something that anyone can do, including many of the wayfinders (and their unexplainably impressive skills) she stdied. I doubt wayfinding skills would translate to long-form writing. But if you were to add up all the decisions one makes in shaping research into story, I'm confident the activity would at least equal if not exceed the brain activity of an animal tracker.
