---
title: "Wayfinding -- finding my way without GPS"
---

## Why wayfinding?

Earlier in this [Journey away from smartphones series](/blog/awakening-moment-to-how-smartphones-fragment-our-attention/), as I formulated my strategies for living without the smartphone's essential apps, I wondered how to get by without a mapping application (e.g., Google Maps or Apple Maps) while driving or biking. These apps, which rely on GPS to pinpoint your location on a map and give you turn-by-turn directions to a destination, were supposed to be one of those can't-live-without-it apps. 

And driving around the city, the essential need for them seemed to be the case. How the heck do people learn the confusing sequences of unfamiliar turns, highway merges and exits, roads and avenues and roundabouts, etc., to reach their destination without the help of GPS? Further, weren't these GPS apps one of those technology advancements that helped reduce congestion by routing people around slow traffic or which warn you about hazards by identifying crashes ahead of time? By not using GPS, wouldn't I be exposing myself to more congestion and crash risk? 

And yet, something about GPS was bothering me. Even though I'd been in Renton, Washington, for more than a year (having moved here from California), I still needed to route to common destinations that I'd driven to many times over. That Safeway just 1.5 miles away? Yeah, I still needed to route to it for some reason. I thought I was just direction-impaired, in part because my wife always made fun of my sense of direction. It seemed that, if choosing routes without the help of GPS, I would always choose the opposite direction I needed to go. Many times on my bike, I'd start riding a bit so that I could see the blue dot move along a map on my smartphone and know which direction I was actually facing. I realized this was pathetic but just attributed it to having a poor sense of direction. My wife had the compass in her head, not me. 

As I started to route without my smartphone, I noticed a new feeling surface every now and then -- a sense of "navigational certitude," as one writer put it, a feeling of confidence and awareness of everything on the road. Not having to glance at a smartphone screen in the corner of my eye to know where I was going, but instead focus more on the road and environment (the pedestrians, cyclists, cars, road construction, intersections, signs, trees, etc.), made me feel more connected and in control while driving. I found that I actually *liked* driving without GPS. I could be present in the driving experience.

After I [reverted from feature phone back to smartphone](/blog/returning-to-smartphones/), I still avoided using GPS apps unless I got lost or was in a pinch and needed directions. Instead, I started looking more carefully at Google Maps on my computer to study my route ahead of time. I learned the logic of streets and avenues, and which streets crossed the freeway, which were main streets and which were residential go-nowhere streets. It didn't take long before I could confidently route to most destinations in my area (including that Safeway). 

My brief experience in routing without GPS led to more interest in wayfinding. I started wondering if perhaps I could make navigation my strength rather than a weakness. I'd read many references to studies of London cabbies who had to learn 25,000 city streets (a road network called "The Knowledge") to enter a privileged order of London cab drivers. The hippocampuses of these cab drivers were noticeably larger, as this part of the brain controls spatial reasoning, navigation, and memory. Perhaps by learning wayfinding (that is, navigating without GPS), I could increase my spatial aptitude (and hippocampus)?

I also wanted to better understand what I felt to be a paradox about the information age. We have an infinitely knowledgeable digital map in our pocket, something that can tell us exactly where we are and how to get to our destination. And yet, despite frequently following the directions provided through this infinitely knowledgeable digital map, my sense of direction and location had in fact deteriorated. I couldn't navigate on my own anymore. Why didn't the digital map make me a better navigator? Why didn't any of the directions sink in to my mind in memorable ways?

I think the routing logic of GPS apps is partly to blame. In Seattle/Renton/Kent, there are many different ways to get to the same place. If driving to work in Fremont, there are half a dozen routes that GPS apps frequently recommend depending on whether it will save me a minute here or there (e.g., I-5, Highway 99, the 405, 509, I-90, and more). But by frequently changing the routes to optimize for time efficiency, it kept me in a constant state of confusion. The way to get places would never stick in my mind (e.g., one day this route, tomorrow another route, the next day yet another). The result was to become more reliant on the app to navigate me. 

So when I saw a book titled *Wayfinding: The Science and Mystery of How Humans Navigate the World*, I decided to read it. I learned that wayfinding is a robust domain that has been the focus of countless research and study. This book just scratched the surface to an area I knew almost nothing about. Did reading this book teach me the secret to wayfinding? Sort of, but it's not a "simple trick" that can be learned overnight. Wayfinding is much deeper and more interesting than I thought.

## Questions about wayfinding

Finding a book interesting, I've learned, often occurs when the we have the same questions as the author. In *Wayfinding: The Science and Mystery of How Humans Navigate the World*, M.R. O'Connor has these questions: 

* "What happens when we outsource navigation to a gadget?" (5)
* "What exactly is it that humans are doing when we navigate? How and why do we do it differently from birds, bees, and whales?" (6)
* How has the speed and convenience of technology changed how we move through the world and how we see our place in it?" (6)
* "What if GPS is a gadget that [severs] the individual from direct experience and generational knowledge of a place?" (14)

As you can see, there's a strong interest in how technology, specifically GPS, has influenced our thought patterns when it comes to wayfinding. Like so many books in this genre, the man-vs-machine theme surfaces and gives us pause about the "benefits" of the technology to our lives.

## Overall argument about Wayfinding

What is wayfinding? One geographer, quoted by O'Connor, says wayfinding is "the ability to determine a route, learn it, and retrace or reverse it from memory through the acquisition of environmental knowledge" (16). Wayfinding is literally finding your way, especially without a clear set of directions, to get to a destination.

Wayfinding and navigation are topics of immense interest in the scientific community. Animal wayfinding tends to be the most impressive, with bees, ants, whales, migratory birds, salmon, etc., performing unexplainable feats of wayfinding, sometimes through a magnetic sixth sense. But beyond the animal wayfinding, human wayfinding is also interesting. Studies show memory is deeply intertwined with wayfinding and spatial reasoning. Scientific reasoning and imagination are also connected to wayfinding. 

Wayfinding isn't just a matter of imposing a Cartesian map in your head to make sense of your surroundings. It's more complicated. Wayfinding requires you to derive inferences and conclusions from small environmental details, to construct stories about what happened in the past and imagine what will happen in the future. Wayfinding is a skill that arises from an ability to "feel the land" as well as from cultural and experiential knowledge about a place. 

Wayfinding taps into the spatial centers of our brain, the hippocampus, and is closely connected with memory. Think about how the Greeks used memory palaces (*loci*) as a way of storing information in individual rooms -- storing the information in a place allowed them to more easily recall it. That's because the hippocampus isn't just about manipulating spaces and places but also storing memories in those places, such that memories and places are intertwined. In fact, one reason scientists study wayfinding, O'Connor explains, is because wayfinding is a way to get to memory. (Then along the way, scientists also become interested in wayfinding itself.)

Overall, from what I can tell, there's not a single theory about how wayfinding occurs in the brain, but metaphors like the hippocampus as GPS or having a map in your head don't reflect the complexity of what's going on. A theme O'Connor returns to many times is that wayfinding is more like following music -- a cadence that is rooted by various markers in time, and whose progress we can intuit. O'Connor writes, "Maybe the metaphor at the heart of navigation is not following a map but listening and intuiting the progress of a piece of music" (179).

Wayfinding is an experience in both space and time, and some say your brain connects vista points in sequences over time, such that one landmark triggers another sequence. Orienting through these landmarks is what's called the beacon strategy. Other wayfinding strategies involve dead reckoning ("keeping track of every stage of a journey in order to compute one's location" (174). Some navigate by following stories their ancestors told about the land (such as the Aboriginal Australians following "dreaming tracks", which are "the network of Aboriginal trade routes and cultural thruways that crisscrosses the whole of the continent like a noospheric highway system" (135). Others wayfind by paying close attention to wave patterns in the water (such as people of Oceania sailing to small islands hundreds of miles away). 

In a broad statement, O'Connor says, "What is navigation really? Insights into time cells, social space, and music highlight how complex human navigation in the brain is: not just a calculation based on reading a Cartesian map but an unfolding memory or narrative sequence, human relationships, sensory experiences, personal history, or paths into the future" (177). 

If there's one enemy to the mental and social benefits of wayfinding, it's GPS, specifically following turn-by-turn directions to get to a destination. GPS removes decision-making and spatial reasoning demands from our brain, potentially atrophying our hippocampus. This atrophy could go beyond just getting lost more frequently but also spill into areas of cognitive decline, including loss of memory, identity, and imagination. There's no study correlating GPS apps with Alzheimer's, and the author is careful not to assert any relationship, but it's hard not to speculate some influence. Any part of the body or brain that you don't use atrophies, period.

This all sounds pretty vague, I know. People study many different aspects of navigation. In this post, I'll look at these five areas:

* Close observation and immersion in the physical world
* Scientific thinking and logical inferences
* Cultural and historical connections with the land
* Hippocampus and episodic memory
* Effects of GPS

I'll also interweave these ideas with some experiences to try to make sense of wayfinding in my own life. I'll also argue that our road-dependent infrastructure, specifically the urban bland suburban landscape, numbs interest in taking stock of our surroundings and makes navigation more about finding the fastest route from point to point. Given this roadscape and car-dependent lifestyle, with increasing automation, wayfinding will likely become completely outsourced to algorithms that optimize for more efficient travel times.

## Wayfinding requires you to be present in the world

The foundation of wayfinding involves a "being present" mindset with the world around you. You have to pay close attention to the environment you're interacting with. O'Connor says, navigation "start[s] with practicing acute observation of the places you already live" (298). As she interacted with various wayfinding cultures -- the Inuit, Oceania, Aboriginal Australians -- and with wayfinding experts who study neuroscience and psychology, she asked tips on learning wayfinding and navigation. "Again and again, I was surprised by how simple the answers were," she says. "Learn to draw," said one professor, and continued: "We don't know how to represent the world well enough. Actually paying attention to the environment, making empirical observations and organizing them into a system -- do that" (298).

The first principle of wayfinding, then, is to be attentive to the world around you -- so much that you could draw it. You have to be in the world, taking in the full sensory experience, not just the visual landscape, but the topography (inclines, declines), the wind patterns, the light, its history, and basically every detail you can observe and feel. 

Being in the world requires that you mediate the world directly rather than by way of a screen. O'Connor says, "...wayfinding is an activity that confronts us with the marvelous fact of being in the world, requiring us to look up and take notice, to cognitively and emotionally interact with our surroundings whether we are in the wilderness or a city, even calling us to renew our species' love affair with freedom, exploration, and place" (10).

Part of the reason I like interacting with maps so much on my computer is because these maps represent a form of what's out there, in the real world. By looking at places and planning routes, forays to different places, I feel the exhilaration of knowing that, eventually, I'll no longer be sitting in this computer chair looking at a flat screen but will be physically out in the world, feeling the sun or rain or looking at gray clouds as I move about on foot, on bike, or use some other mode of travel in the real world.

Unfortunately, even when we go out into the world, modern life erects barriers between us and the world. To get from place to place, we get into our cars and shut the door on the world. The sound outside quiets, we adjust the temperature of our environment, turn up the radio, and then move forward without any physical exertion at all. Insulated from the raw experience of the environment, we accelerate across cement landscapes in our own private space, protected from interacting with others except as other car forms. Is it any wonder that, as we cut ourselves off from the experience of the world, our wayfinding skills suffer?

One of the Inuit people O'Connor interviewed said, "Being out on the land lifts you up spiritually, emotionally, and physically. It gives you medication, or meditation, however you want to call it" (36). As someone who spends most of his life sitting in front of a computer, on a cushioned chair in an air-conditioned space, as do most modern workers, I feel a longing for more connection with the land, to be outside, moving around, interacting with the environment in a more direct way (rather than with a screen).

When I am out in the world, I'm often traveling from one place to another, such as from home to work, or running errands. The car as a mode of travel not only insulates us from a more direct experience with the environment, it travels too quickly for us to take in details (225). "In a car when you travel, you miss a lot of country, a lot of stories," says one of the Aboriginal Australians O'Connor interviewed (193). Speed has an inverse relationship with the details you take in -- the faster the speed, the less detail. John MacDonald, an Inuit researcher, says, "The faster you traverse the land, the less observant of it you become" (78).

As we drive along roads at 65 mph or more, it's hard to notice much of anything (160). Further, because many of the roads we take follow the fastest route, there's less to look at, as the landscape along thoroughfares is generally more lifeless and banal than more scenic, leisurely routes. Driving down an interstate highway is an activity that induces hypnosis.

In this way, the modern modes of travel are at odds with developing skills of wayfinding. Wayfinding experts say to be super observant of the surrounding landscape, but our modern modes of travel (driving a car, following efficient GPS routes zipping along highways and thoroughfares) strip the landscape of interest and detail. Our minds tune out the surrounding areas and we focus instead on the radio or podcasts as a way to bide the time until we reach our destination. In many of the cultures O'Connor studied, the journey was part of the reason for the trip. One group in Oceania seemed to go on a long sailing trip to a distant island to acquire some small grocery item, not for the item, but for the opportunity to sail across the water.

## Affinity for a place

Paying close attention to the land requires some affinity for the place you're in. If you have deep connections culturally, historically, and religiously to the land, you're more apt to take in those details and remember them. O'Connor uses the term *topophilia* to describe this "the sense of attachment and love for place" (296). If you establish a connection to the land, you'll be more likely to carefully observe its details. "If you're paying attention and listen, often there is a whole other story, telling us where we are," explained one of the Oceania people, talking about sailing (245). You can't see that hidden story unless you slow down and absorb the details of an area.

O'Connor says that to develop topophilia, we have to accumulate treasure maps of memories: "Across cultures, navigation is influenced by particular environmental conditions -- snow, sand, water, wind -- and topographies -- mountain, valley, river, ocean, and desert," O'Connor says. "But in all of them, it is also a means by which individuals develop a sense of attachment and feeling for places. Navigating becomes a way of knowing, familiarity, and fondness. It is how you can fall in love with a mountain or a forest. Wayfinding is how we accumulate treasure maps of exquisite memories" (297). 

Not just maps, but *treasure maps*. To develop an affinity for a place, you have to learn its history and stories -- its treasures. In the United States, we move from place to place every five years or so, whether for job opportunities or other circumstances (or just boredom). As such, it's hard to know an area beyond a superficial level. And at a superficial level, how do we move from maps to treasure maps? 

A place doesn't have to be spectacular to be a treasure map. Our sense of place as a home usually has deep roots with our psyche. Think about why one of the first questions we ask each other is "Where are you from?" Why does place matter so much? Where we grew up is much more than just a logistical question. Places reference our homes. How does a place become your home? 

For O'Connor, her home "was the small, scrappy chicken farm that [she] had loved so much and so briefly as a child" (304), a place that "shaped [her] like clay" (305). I grew up in a small town in a dairy valley (Burlington, Washington), and like O'Connor, I can also still trace out the map of my childhood's neighborhood (the slough in the back along a dirt trail, the roads up to the central park with its baseball fields and dirt mounds for biking, the long gravel roads along the dike out to the Skagit River and its sandy/dirty shoreline, the dirt farm fields where I rode around on my motorcycle). And yet, if a stranger were to drive through Burlington, this area would be entirely unmemorable. It looks like just a small town whose economic livelihood is questionable and where people live in 75-year-old homes that haven't changed much with the passage of time. But for me, the map is my treasure map.
