
## Spatial and scientific reasoning from Wayfinding

Regardless of whether you actually develop successful wayfinding skills, there's another reason for wayfinding: it stimulates the spatial reasoning of your brain's hippocampus. This gets us more to the reasons why neuroscientists and other academics are fascinated by wayfinding. The hippocampus is the area of the brain that lights up during wayfinding, but the hippocampus doesn't just perform spatial mapping; it encodes events in a location context in your memory and gives rise to scientific thinking and imagination.

Some researchers think scientific reasoning developed as a result of early hunters tracking animals by interpreting signs. This is called the *social trackways theory*. O'Connor says, "Hominids are animals that learned to 'read' the tracks of other hominies and animals and eventually infer meaning about events that happened in the past from these symbols. This enabled them to predict future behaviors based on these stories and use them to find one another, avoid predators, and successfully hunt prey" (105). In other words, as early humans tried to find the locations of animals, they had to look closely at tracks and interpret signs in the environment. They had to assemble these signs into a coherent story that would explain which animals had been there and predict where they had gone.

Louis Liebenberg, Harvard professor of evolutionary biology, says "[trackers] have to create a working hypothesis in which spoor evidence is supplemented with hypothetical assumptions based not only on their knowledge of animal behavior, but also on their creative ability to solve new problems and discover new information." Liebenberg argues that "rational scientific thinking didn't originate with the ancient Greeks but with hunter-gatherers" (qtd. in O'Connor, 218-19).

Tracking requires a great number of logical inferences and deductions. This thinking eventually led to similar analytical thought processes like Sherlock Holmes, Freud, and others, O'Connor explains (101). "Our existence depends on thousands of instances of inference and deduction that allow us to draw conclusions about other people and things, what has happened and what will happen," O'Connor says (103). The hunter constructs a "narrative sequence" based on the perceived signs to indicate what happened in a place and where an animal ventured to (102). These narrative sequences gave way to story and storytelling, which some academics believe is the center piece of human intelligence (122-23).

Apparently, this same reasoning process also gave way to *autonoetic* thought processes, in which humans are able to see themselves from an outside perspective. The "autonoetic consciousness" is "the capacity to be aware of one's own existence as an entity in time" (105). If you can conceive of an animal's purpose for having been in a place and where it traveled to, you can apply the same thought processes to yourself, observing your own self as if an outside observer, analyzing and perceiving yourself and your actions as if from another person's perspective.

As you can guess, these reasoning processes don't light up in the brain when people blindly follow turn-by-turn directions in a GPS-based app. If you're not making decisions, you're not getting any of the benefits of wayfinding. In fact, most of my wayfinding doesn't involve anything approaching the kind of observations and deductions required to track animals. In my wayfinding, I study a map beforehand, identify what appears to be a good route, commit it more or less to memory (maybe with some notes on paper, or by printing it out), and then navigate there. I'm making a minimal number of decisions about the route -- optimizing for safety, efficiency, and scenery. 

But the type of reasoning involved in animal tracking is much more Sherlock Holmesian. After reading this section in O'Connor's book, one of my daughters lost her iPhone, and filled with confidence about the development of the human brain through animal tracking, I thought I could track down the phone's whereabouts. Like an early hunter thinking through the details, I narrowed down the last time she had the phone, events that day and since, potential places it could and could not be, a radius from the last know location before the battery died, common places where my daughter interacted in house, and more. I thought I could think through the problem, or potentially eliminate all other possibilities until arriving at the location the phone must be (just as Holmes would say, "When you have eliminated all which is impossible, then whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth"). Alas, despite my initial confidence, I did not locate the iPhone. It is still lost. 

However, the experience made me more aware of this scientific reasoning and how it connects with wayfinding. I think similar modes of thinking could be observed in non-wayfinding scenarios. For example, a programmer who tracks down the source of a tech bug employs similar logical skills. To troubleshoot, the programmer might isolate different elements to test, or might strip down a piece of code to its simplest form and them build it back up piece by piece, analyzing the effects of each addition until it breaks. The programmer might search error messages, log files, recreate the issue and observe different analytics (memory usage, performance waterfalls, etc.) all trying to track down the whereabouts of the faulty code. The troubleshooter might identify all the components in a system and draw arrows in how they interrelate, and do other intuitive tasks to suss out the issue. 

Anytime you're problem solving, you're paying close attention to detail and making many decisions and adjustments based on observations and feedback. How might this same decision-making play out in current practices of modern wayfinding with maps? I've spent many hours looking at bike routes in the areas near me. Which streets look safe? If the streets lack protected paths, are the sidewalks safe? How fast are the cars traveling? Can they see me if I'm riding in the road? Does the route get me to a public transportation hub that could connect me to another part of the city? Would a bus, train, link light rail, or some other transportation service be available for the starting location and destination I want to go? What combination of car + train + bike would work best, getting me there in about an hour? Which segment of the journey is best accomplished by each mode of travel? Would a longer route, more scenic route be safer? Would an eBike close a longer distance for me or just create other issues? How does rain complicate the route? Am I riding up or downhill? Which time would be best to leave at? What's the maximum length for each segment mode? If I optimize for time but sacrifice exercise, is that actually saving me time? Can I be productive on a train? What about train productivity during rush hour, when only standing room is available?

I've spent days looking at maps, then exploring areas in experiential ways, taking note of the widths of bike paths, the inclines or declines, traffic congestion, stop-and-go momentum with lights, and more. Then I take this feedback and adjust my route and plan. Does this attempt to find optimal bike routes work qualify as wayfinding? Does it involve enough decision-making, experimentation, imagination, logical inferences from sign reading, feedback loops, and other judgements that would cause my hippocampus and prefrontal cortex to come alive? 

When I finally found a commute that seemed to work for me, I was ecstatic. I could get from home to work (door to door) in 70 minutes by combining car + train + bike, traveling an impressive distance in a predictable time even with traffic congestion. I wrote about my strategy in [My multimodal commuting strategy](https://idratherbewriting.com/blog/multimodal-commuting-strategies.html) and later volunteered for a [commuter spotlight](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxMU3pP1bLE&ab_channel=CommuteSeattle).

## Keeping the wayfinding mindset fresh

With wayfinding, one danger is that after you find a route, once that route becomes a habit, and you no longer use your spatial reasoning and deductive powers, your hippocampus no longer gets used. Instead, the path becomes encoded to an automated habit stored by the caudate nucleus. O'Connor says when this happens, "autopilot takes over. You see the white building, it acts as a stimulus and triggers a response to turn left to get to the bakery" (263).

This pattern befalls all successful wayfinders, because as soon as you find your way and start taking that route time and again, all the brain benefits of wayfinding seem to disappear. To counter this, O'Connor says you need to vary your routes, try new paths, and more. You want to avoid automation taking over. "Take new streets and shortcuts to get places; regularly draw a bird's-eye view of your environment with landmarks; incorporate new behaviors and routes into your daily life" (268).

Reading this, I thought about how my wife likes to go hiking in the same Lake Desire trail system. She's been there so many times (75 or more within the past year, for sure) that she knows the right paths through the many unmarked (or poorly described) trails. She no longer has to think about whether to turn left or right at the many forks and junctions. Although the trail junctions do have signs, she's long past the point where she even looks at them. She can put aside any thinking about wayfinding and focus on a podcast or chat with a friend. She turns at each fork in the trail without even thinking which way to go. It's the same way that driving home, when I get to about 2 miles from home, I no longer even look at road signs because the landscape is visually familiar. I sometimes forget the names of streets.

I sometimes accompany my wife on these hikes. On the most recent outing, I asked if we could go somewhere new. So instead of Lake Desire, we went to Henry's Ridge. The trails were spaghetti (a compressed pattern designed more for mountain bike riding, it seems, rather than hiking). I printed out a map and we tried to navigate by looking at various signs, but the map was rudimentary and seemed incomplete or inaccurate compared to the reality of the trails. Nevertheless, we compared signs posted on trees with trail names on the map and made our best guesses. 

We walked first along Stingr trail and then on Beaver Trax, over to Ravensdale Lake, then up Snake trail and across Bail trail and then following some wider general access paths and who knows what -- eventually, we just started walking in the general direction toward our car along whatever trail seemed headed in that direction. A couple of times my wife checked her GPS to ensure we were heading in the right direction.

By trying a new route, we were forced into a state of more acute awareness of the environment, especially when we weren't sure which way to go. This hyper awareness prompted me wife to take more stock of the many types of trees, plants, and other vegetation. At least a half dozen times she stopped to use her naturalist app to identify the type of tree/plant/shrub we were passing.

[photos]

Comparing a map's drawings with what you see in real life is always a mismatch, which is the whole difficulty of wayfinding. The mismatch reinforces the truth that all maps are a metaphor to the environment, optimizing for some detail that the map maker wanted to emphasize. By definition, maps must be rudimentary subset of what you actually see in the environment. This mismatch between the map (what you see on paper) and the world (what you see looking around you) is what forces our brain to make associations, interpretive leaps, to infer conclusions from small details, and so on. It forces you into spatial reasoning modes to make some correlation between a model on paper with a model of the real world. When the map doesn't seem to match reality, that's when the brain's spatial powers kick into overdrive. Is this scribble the trail fork we're looking at? What other landmarks can we see to confirm that what we're looking at is in fact this mark on the map?

Following a trail map is highly similar to following product instructions to put together some physical product, such as a dresser or, in the latest purchase, a composter. One locates the instructions, looks at the pictures and then tries to map the images to the pieces, screws, and other unfamiliar mechanical gizmos in the box. Then step by step, you correlate the assembly pictures with the various pieces strewn all over the floor until you build the object. 

[image of composter instructions]

In other words, instructions (especially highly visual ones) are a map that the user must try to follow. It involves a high degree of spatial reasoning, comparing, matching, intuiting, and more. Assembling things isn't something anyone can do without practice. My youngest daughter (11 years old) is a skilled artisan with cardboard, but she flounders when assembling anything from IKEA. 

My wife, on the other hand, scored high on the ASVAB test (the military even tried to recruit her because of her score), and seems to have a knack for interpreting instructions to assemble products. When I assist, I often just want to be the grunt who does what she says (e.g., insert this screw here, bolt this there) because I know that being the interpreter requires much more reasoning, spatial interpretation and identification, etc. It often makes my brain hurt. I supply the muscle, and she supplies the brains.

## Over romanticizing wayfinding?

If scientific reasoning, storytelling, and imagination aren't limited to wayfinding tasks (but could apply to broader tasks like troubleshooting, bicycle path routing, and assembly instructions), then perhaps we're over-romanticizing wayfinding skills. The reality is that there's not much of an economic market for environmental wayfinding anymore. All the cultures O'Connor studied (the Inuit, Aboriginal Australians, and Oceania people) seem to be cultures heading toward extinction. Many of the Inuit now use snowmobiles and GPS today, for example. 

To use an analogy, suppose you hire a trucker to transport goods from the west coast to east coast. One trucker manages to drive the route entirely from memory and his or her wayfinding skill, without a map at all. The other trucker uses a mapping app from the start to end. Both arrive at the same time. While the wayfinding trucker's skills are impressive, it doesn't lead to any economic advantage. They would still be paid the same. Learning wayfinding in some ways feels like the equivalent of doing long division by hand instead of using a calculator. It's cool to be able to do it, but why? 

The principles of careful observation, scientific analysis, story-building, and so on, are highly relevant to many modern technological contexts. It's much more useful to develop these skills in a technology context, being able to troubleshoot computer bugs, solve logistical problems, navigate large projects, structure information according to information architectural principles, and more. Most certainly, O'Connor's 300 page text with hundreds of cited sources, organized along a careful structure to advance her argument and communicate a sense of feeling in the reader, isn't something that anyone can do, including many of the wayfinders (and their unexplainably impressive skills) she stdied. I doubt wayfinding skills would translate to long-form writing. But if you were to add up all the decisions one makes in shaping research into story, I'm confident the activity would at least equal if not exceed the brain activity of an animal tracker.



